---
layout: post
title: Glack
title-lower: glack
title-tiny: glack
blurb: What the heck is a "glack"? This post goes into my thesis. It's very math-heavy, so just skip it...
usemathjax: true
---
{::nomarkdown}

[block]
*Note: Don't forget to not publish this!*

After way too many hurdles, I've finally finished my thesis, woohoo!

Ahem.

This is a post about my thesis, "*Extraction of ZX-diagrams without gflow*". While it's a thesis on quantum computing, not much will be familiar to those that work just with the circuit model! Indeed, none of the words in the title can be found in a regular textbook on quantum computing.

I'll first explain all of those words: I'll start out explaining what ZX-diagrams are, then move on to gflow, and then sketch how gflow allows you to turn ZX-diagrams back into quantum circuits. Finally, I'll move on to my generalisation, "*glack*", and what properties it does and does not have, compared to gflow. **TODO: Better fake TOC.**

ZX-diagrams
===========
For certain kinds of optimizations, the circuit model is somewhat of a poor fit. You have all kinds of primitives to deal with when you want to rewrite your circuit: the $Z$ gate, the $X$ gate, the Hadamard-gate, the CNOT gate, the list goes on and on. When optimizing, you really want a simpler representation for circuits. You can achieve this by limiting yourself to a certain *universal gate set*, but there is not much consensus on which set to use.

The classic solution to this is to introduce *yet another* standard for people to use. The ZX-calculus is quite different from the circuit model, but just as powerful. One major advantage is that the ZX-calculus has very little primitives. In fact, there's just three:

IMAGE WITH REGULAR EDGE, H-EDGE, Z-SPIDER

As you can see, we have regular edges, weird dotted edges, and little circles with a phase in them. Let's start with the most difficult of these: the circles with a phase in them.

DEFINITION Z-SPIDER $\C^{2^n} \to \C^{2^m}$, $\ket{0\cdots0}\bra{0\cdots0} + e^{i\alpha}\ket{1\cdots1}\bra{1\cdots1}$

Unlike the circuit model's gates, these spiders represent maps that are at most rank 2. But with this variable number of inputs and outputs, you can easily implement quite some familiar structures you'll find in the circuit model.

Z GATE, Z(\alpha$) GATE, $\ket\pm$ STATES, $\set{\ket\pm}$ MEASUREMENTS

If we ignore the constant factor, these are the same. As quantum computing is very unitary business, we'll ignore this constant factor throughout the post as long as it's non-zero.

Next up, the normal wires. Just like the circuit model, these represent qubits moving around, or the identity map if you prefer. Unlike the circuit model, we're free to bend these wires however we like, without changing the meaning of the diagram. We can also connect the wires to the spiders wherever we want, swapping order, input wires, or output wires.

NORMAL EQUALS WHACK EQUALS VERY WHACK

This is somewhat surprising with how dependent on the inputs and outputs the definition of spiders is, but with the following three formal definitions, the math works out. (I'll leave that as the obligatory exercise for the reader.)

WIRE EQUALS IDENTITY PLUS CUP CAP SNAKE

Because of this, we'll also allow us to write vertical wires from spiders. This is not part of the original definition, but if it doesn't matter whether it's on the left- or the right side of the spider, it doesn't matter!

The point of this is that it's not the specific behaviour of the wires that matters, but only the connectivity of spiders that matters.

Our final primitive are those weird dotted edges. These simply represent a Hadamard gate being present on a regular wire.

WIRE WITH HADAMARD GATE

With these primitives, you actually have the same expressive power as the circuit model already! One problem, however, is that while we have the same expressive power as the circuit model, it's not easy to translate back into the circuit model. Sure, you could calculate the matrix that a ZX-diagram corresponds to, and synthesize that as a circuit, but I'd rather not work with $2^n \times 2^m$-sized matrices.

This problem is called *circuit extraction*: is it possible to efficiently turn a ZX-diagram back into a circuit, without any ancillae? This has been well-studied already, and it's known that this is very dependent on whether a diagram has *gflow*. I will introduce this property later down the line. We first need to discuss a few operations of ZX, and then *measurement-based quantum computing*.

ZX-calculus
===========

The first operation I'll discuss is that of *fusion*. We saw the $Z(\alpha)$ gate above, which is just a rotation of the Bloch sphere.

BLOCH IMAGE

But if you compose two rotations, their angles just add up. So we can combine a $Z(\alpha)$ and $Z(\beta)$ gate into a $Z(\alpha + \beta)$ gate. In ZX, this looks as follows.

EASY FUSION

This "fusion" does not just hold for spiders with one input and one output wire. There can be as many wires going into and out from the spider as you want.

ARBITRARY FUSION

This gives a very easy diagram simplification already: just fuse whatever you can, as long as you can. Continue until the only regular wires are wires connected to inputs or outputs. Unless stated otherwise, we'll assume that our diagrams are these *graph-like diagrams*.

Unfortunately, Hadamard-edges prevent fusion. However, sometimes we'll be able to move gates past them anyways. Going into the intuition behind this rule takes quite some time, so I'll just leave it at this jump-scare.

CUSTOM $\pi$-COPY WITHOUT REDS

Finally, to ease the jump-scare a little, let's end this section with a simple rule. A spider with no phase is just the identity (**TODO: Just write the zeroes**), and two Hadamards are also the identity. This gives us the following rule.

IDENTITY REMOVAL WITHOUT REDS

The ZX-calculus has a bit more rules than just these, but these suffice for this post.

Measurement-based quantum computing
===================================
Apart from the circuit model and ZX-diagrams, there's a third way to represent quantum algorithms: *measurement-based quantum computing*, or MBQC for short.

The idea in MBQC is simple. While in the circuit model, you're applying tons of gates to qubits with the occasional measurement, in MBQC measurements are the *only* thing you do. For this to have any effect, you need to start with a state that's highly entangled -- otherwise, measurements wouldn't affect other qubits, so you'd hardly call it "computation"!

So, to fully specify an algorithm, MBQC needs two things: the initial state, and the measurements. The initial state consists of only entangling operations (i.e. CZ-gates), so this can be described with a *graph state*.

IMAGE ABOUT GRAPH STATES AND THE ZX FORMULATION

Yes, we'll be using ZX to represent MBQC circuits, as it's very convenient for this task. Every spider in this state is connected only to other spiders in this state, and a *measurement effect* at the end. What measurements do we allow? Well, arbitrary angles along axis-aligned Bloch sphere planes:

$$\begin{align*}
      &\ket{\pm_{\XY,\alpha}} = \ket 0 \pm e^{i\alpha} \ket 1;
    \\&\ket{\pm_{\XZ,\alpha}} = \cos(\tfrac\alpha2)\ket0\pm\sin(\tfrac\alpha2)\ket1;
    \\&\ket{\pm_{\YZ,\alpha}} = \ket + \pm e^{i\alpha} \ket -.
\end{align*}$$

BLOCH IMAGE

In ZX, the implementation of these three bases looks very simple.

MEASUREMENT BASES VS ZX MEASUREMENT EFFECTS

Here, the $a$ variable represents our measurement outcome. A value of $a=0$ is the "expected" outcome, while $a=1$ introduces an additional $\pi$ factor that we will have to take into consideration for later measurements. Because of these extra $\pi$ factors, order suddenly starts to matter. Consider the following simple MBQC diagram:

EQ (3.4) FROM THESIS

Both $u$ and $v$ are measured in the XY-plane, with measurement angles $\alpha$ and $\beta$. If we first correct $u$, we need to handle the $a\pi$ factor that appears, which we $\pi$-copy over. This then changes the measurement of $v$ from $\beta + b\pi$ to $(-1)^a\beta + b\pi$:

EQ (3.5) FROM THESIS

However, there is a limitation to these corrections. We may only correct vertices we have not yet measured. In some cases, this may result in diagrams which cannot be corrected at all. Consider for instance the following triangle.

EQ (3.4) BUT A TRIANGLE INSTEAD OF A LINE

Similar to before, correcting $u$ adds a $(-1)^a$ factor to both $v$ and $w$'s measurements. But if we now want to correct $v$, we must push a $(-1)^b$ factor to $u$ -- which we already measured! In effect, we have to change the past, which is not allowed. There's also no way around this. We cannot find a good *measurement order* here.

But don't give up just yet, things are about to get worse. The MBQC diagrams we considered above have no inputs or outputs. But what if we *do* have those? Consider the well-known teleportation protocol, and the following ZX-version of it.

EQ (3.1) FROM THESIS AND SORT-OF BOTTOM OF PG32

Teleportation is really a MBQC thing already, as the main characters are the two measurements. However, these measurements induce corrections, which give the $a\pi$ and $b\pi$ nodes. In general, having corrections *fed forward* on the output wires is unavoidable in MBQC. However, if we have such errors on the outputs, we can also have them on the inputs when you chain diagrams together! An MBQC algorithm must not only specify what errors are fed forward depending on the measurements, but also what happens to any errors on inputs.

ZX TELEPORTATION BUT WITH INPUT ERRORS

Let's formalize this a bit. We'll start with *(labeled) open graphs*. These are graphs that are "open" in the sense that they have input and output wires, and labeled with measurement planes.

> (**Open Graph**) Let $G$ be a graph. A *(labeled) open graph* is a quartuple $(G, I, O, \lambda)$, where $I, O \subseteq V(G)$ are the *inputs* and *outputs* respectively, and $\lambda: \overline O \to \set{\XY, \XZ, \YZ}$ is a map assigning measurement planes to non-output vertices.  
> Vertices in $I \cup O$ are called *boundary vertices*, while the other vertices are *internal vertices*.

We can now formally define *measurement fragments*.

> (**Measurement Fragment**) A *measurement fragment* consists of:
> - An open graph $(G, I, O, \lambda)$. Define $n_i := \abs I$, $n_o := \abs O$, $m := \abs{\overline O}$.
> - A measurement order $M: \set{1, \dots, m} \to \overline O$, which is bijective.
> - For each measured qubit $M(k) \in \overline O$, a measurement angle map
> 
>   $$\begin{equation*}\alpha_k: \F_2^{k-1} \times \set{\mathbb I, Z}^{n_i} \times \set{\mathbb I, X}^{n_i} \to \mathbb R\end{equation*}$$
> 
>   that may depend on the outcome of the previous $k-1$ measurements, and the feed-forward errors $Z^z$ and $X^x$ on the input qubits from a previous fragment.
> - Maps
> 
>   $$\begin{align*}&f_Z: \F_2^m \times \set{\mathbb I, Z}^{n_1} \times \set{\mathbb I, X}^{n_i} \to \set{\mathbb I, Z}^{n_o}\\&f_X: \F_2^m \times \set{\mathbb I, Z}^{n_1} \times \set{\mathbb I, X}^{n_i} \to \set{\mathbb I, X}^{n_o}\end{align*}$$
> 
>   giving the feed-forward errors $Z^z$ and $X^x$ on the output qubits of this fragment.

This is a mouthful, but this matches what we discussed above. Order matters, so we have a measurement order. Errors are a thing, so every measurement may contribute to output errors, and every measurement needs to take into account input errors.

Gflow
=====
The line diagram we saw before has an order that allowed it to be corrected, but the triangle did not. What is the difference between the two? Well, the difference is in whether the diagram has *gflow*. As the gflow definition is quite extensive, we will start with an easier flow called *causal flow*.

> (**Causal Flow**) Let $(G, I, O, \lambda)$ be an open graph where $\lambda \equiv \XY$. Then $G$ has *causal flow* if there exists a map $f: \overline O \to \overline I$ and a strict partial order $\prec$ in $V(G)$ such that the following flow conditions hold for all $v$ in $g$'s domain:
> 1. We have $v \prec f(v)$;
> 2. If $w \in N(\set{f(v)}) \setminus \set v$, then $v \prec w$;
> 3. Vertices $v$ and $f(v)$ are neighbours.
> If $u \prec v$, we say that $u$ is in $v$'s *past*, and $v$ is in $u$'s *future*.

You could also think of $\prec$ as the relation induced by points 1 and 2, and then require it to be a partial order.

With causal flow, our order problems are solved. For $v \in \overline O$ an arbitrary vertex, consider the following diagram.

THAT THING IN PF 3.2.2

Here, $f(v)$ and all the $w_i$ lie in $v$'s future, and are thus unmeasured. (The $w_i$ may also be output vertices, but I omit this special case.) This means that we can freely update these phases without affecting the past. In particular, we can remove a $a_v\pi$ term from all of these vertices. For the vertices in $N(\set{f_v})$, we extract this phase directly, while for $f(v)$, we extract a phase with Hadamards around it.

SECOND PART OF THAT DIAGRAM

Now we can do a $\pi$-copy to move $f(v)$'s $a_v\pi$ up to all of $N(\set{f_v})$, and cancel the resulting $2a_v\pi \equiv 0$ vertices. We now have the same diagram, but where $v$ is corrected, and only vertices in the future of $v$ have their measurement changed:

LAST PART OF THE DIAGRAM

However, having just one vertex take on the role of $f(v)$ may not be sufficient. Sometimes it may be necessary to get multiple vertices to copy a $a_v\pi$ factor over to their neighbours. If a vertex receives from multiple neighbours, these factors may cancel out again.

> (**Odd Neighbourhood**) Let $G$ be a graph and $A \subseteq V(G)$ be any set of vertices. Then the *odd neighbourhood* of $A$ is
> 
> $$\begin{equation*}\Odd(A) := \set{v \in V(G) \where v \in N(a) \text{ for an odd number of } a \in A}\end{equation*}$$,
> 
> all vertices connected to an odd amount of vertices in $A$.

This odd neighbourhood can also be seen as the symmetric difference of all individual neighbourhoods, $\Odd(A) = \Symdiff_{a \in A}N(a)$.

This odd neighbourhood definition is enough to generalize the causal flow into something where $f(v)$ is instead multiple vertices.

> (**Uniplanar gflow**) Let $(G, I, O, \lambda)$ be an open graph where $\lambda \equiv \XY$. Then $G$ has *uniplanar gflow* if there exists a map $g: \overline O \to \powerset(\overline I)$ and a strict partial order $\prec$ on $V(G)$ such that the following flow conditions hold for all $v$ in $g$'s domain:
> 1. If $w \in g(v) \setminus \set v$, then $v \prec w$;
> 2. If $w \in \Odd(g(v)) \setminus \set v$, then $v \prec w$;
> 3. We have $v \notin g(v)$ and $v \in \Odd(g(v))$.
> 
> This set $g(v)$ is called the *correction set*.

These three conditions are generalisations of the three respective conditions in causal flow. Both first statements state that our special vertices (whether $f(v)$ or the correction set $g(v)$) must be in $v$'s future. Both second statements state that the fallout of the correction must also be limited to $v$'s future. Finally, the odd neighbourhood is adjacent to $v$ itself, so the third point is also a generalisation.

Now, very similar to before, we can correct any vertex by affecting only its future. The only difference between this derivation, and the last, is that we have some more vertices on the bottom.

ANIMATION SWITCHING BETWEEN THE TWO DERIVATIONS

Both causal flow and uniplanar gflow limited themselves to the case where everything is XY-measured. But if you remember, we also allow XZ- and YZ-measurements. So now it's time to expand the uniplanar gflow to *triplanar gflow*.

> (**Gflow**) Let $(G, I, O, \lambda)$ be an open graph. Then $G$ has *(triplanar) gflow* if there exists a map $g: \overline O \to \powerset(\overline I)$ and a strict partial order $\prec$ on $V(G)$ such that the following *gflow conditions* hold for all $v$ in $g$'s domain:
> 1. If $w \in g(v) \setminus \set v$, then $v \prec w$;
> 2. If $w \in \Odd(g(v)) \setminus \set v$, then $v \prec w$;
> 3. If $\lambda(v) = \XY$, then $v \notin g(v)$ and $v \in \Odd(g(v))$;
> 4. If $\lambda(v) = \XZ$, then $v \in g(v)$ and $v \in \Odd(g(v))$;
> 5. If $\lambda(v) = \YZ$, then $v \in g(v)$ and $v \notin \Odd(g(v))$.

Again, the proof for showing that this allows us to correct any vertex remains largely unchanged. In the uniplanar case, we could introduce $a_v\pi$ spiders at both the correction set and its odd neighbourhood. The only "new" thing you have to argue is that this is still possible, even if you have XZ- and YZ-measurements. This is pretty easy, so I won't go into this further.

Gflow is a pretty nice property. Not only does it allow us to define a measurement order, it even tells us that our circuit is *deterministic*: apart from any feed-forward errors, the linear map represented is the same, no matter your measurement outcomes.

In fact, there is a polynomial-time algorithm for extracting diagrams with gflow, without introducing any ancillae. The specifics of this algorithm are far beyond the scope of this post, unfortunately. At a high level, the algorithm tries to extract a single spider as simple gates **TODO: details**, step by step. Gflow guarantees there is at least one spider available to extract this way.

Many operations of the ZX-calculus that optimize diagrams maintain gflow, and if you start from a circuit without measurements, you also get it for free. This gives a full pipeline "circuit ↦ ZX-diagram ↦ optimized diagram ↦ extracted circuit", that can be fairly successful when optimizing parameters such as the T-count.

Note that it makes sense we can only extract diagrams with gflow with this algorithm. We only extract into a universal set of quantum gates. There are *no* measurements and no other components interacting with the classical world in this output. As briefly mentioned before, gflow implies determinism, which in turn implies that measurement outcomes do not matter for the overall map we implement. When measurements *do* matter, this algorithm has no way of implementing them, so it naturally cannot work.

Glack
=====
In my thesis, I looked at a deceptively simple generalisation of gflow. "Well, if we do not have gflow, because not all vertices have a correction set..." I started thinking. "What if we simply allow some vertices to remain uncorrected?"

This gives us the following fairly combinatorial definition.

> (**Glack**) Let $(G, I, O, \lambda)$ be an open graph. Then $G$ has a *glack[^1] of $k$* if:
> - There exists a *lacking* set $L \subseteq \overline O$ of size $k$, a map $g: \overline {O \cup L} \to \powerset(\overline I)$, and a strict partial order $\prec$ on $V(G)$ such that the gflow conditions hold for all $v$ in $g$'s domain.
> - There does not exist such $(L', g', \prec')$ with $\abs{L'} < k$.
> 
> We call such a tuple $(L, g, \prec)$ a *certificate* of the glack. Vertices in $L$ are *lacking* vertices.

When working with gflow, it's a common technique to modify one gflow $(g_1, \prec_1)$ into another $(g_2, \prec_2)$, such that it has some property. These glack certificates are no different. For instance, sometimes it will be helpful to have certificates that are "easy" when it comes to a vertex. To showcase how these certificates work more in-depth, I'll show the following statement.

**TODO: May need to write $\Odd(A \symdiff B) = \Odd(A) \symdiff \Odd(B)$ explicitly somewhere.**

> (**Lemma**) Let $(G, I, O, \lambda)$ be an open graph with a glack certificate $(L, g, \prec)$, and let $u \in V(G)$. Then there exists a $g'$ such that:
> - The graph is also certified by $(L, g', \prec)$;
> - There exists at most one vertex $v_a$ with $u \in g'(v_a)$;
> - Other than possibly $v_a$, there exists at most one vertex $v_b$ with $u \in \Odd(g'(v_b))$.

In general, a vertex $u$ can appear in "many" correction sets and in "many" odd neighbourhoods. These dependencies sometimes make life difficult. However, with this, we can limit the complexity around $u$ to at most two, and commonly only one vertex.

> *Proof.* We will translate in steps to reduce these dependencies. We will first start reducing the number of vertices that contain $u$ directly in their correction set. To that end, consider $v_1$ and $v_2$ with $u \in g(v_1)$ and $u \in g(v_2)$.
> - If WLOG $v_1 \prec v_2$, then we also have $v_1 \prec g(v_2)$ and $v_1 \prec \Odd(g(v_2))$ by the gflow conditions. In particular, $v_1 \notin g(v_2) \cup \Odd(g(v_2))$. This means we can update $g(v_1) \leftarrow g(v_1) \symdiff g(v_2)$ without affecting conditions 3 through 5. Conditions 1 and 2 are also still true, as we update $g(v_1)$ and $\Odd(g(v_1))$ only by vertices in the future of $v_1$.
> - If $v_1$ and $v_2$ are $\prec$-unrelated, we claim we can again update $g(v_1) \leftarrow g(v_1) \symdiff g(v_2)$ without violating the gflow conditions. Consider $w \in g(v_2) \cup \Odd(g(v_2))$. As $v_2 \prec w$, we cannot have $w \prec v_1$, as otherwise we would have $v_2 \prec v_1$, which we already handled. Particularly, $w \neq v_1$. This means that none of the conditions are in peril if we update our correction set.
> 
> Now, we can repeat the above process as long as there are differing $v_1$ and $v_2$ with $u$ in their correction set. Eventually, those no longer exist, and at most one vertex $v_a$ will contain $u$ in its correction set.
> 
> Next, we will reduce the number of vertices with $u \in \Odd(g(v))$. For convenience, we will assume $v_a$ exists, but the same argument holds if it doesn't.
> 
> Define $S = \set{v \neq v_a \where u \in \Odd(g(v))}$, which are all our candidates for $v_b$. This set may be empty, in which case we're done, so assume it's non-empty. Among the vertices in $S$, pick a $\prec$-maximal vertex $v_b$. As $v_a \neq v_b$, we have $u \notin g(v_b)$.
> 
> For each $v \in S \setminus \set{v_b}$, update $g(v) \leftarrow g(v) \symdiff g(v_b)$. Similarly to before, whether $v_b$ and $v$ are $\prec$-related or not, $g(v)$ remains a valid correction set. Importantly, after each update, we get $u \notin \Odd(g(v))$, and we still have $u \notin g(v)$. As such after doing this for all of $S \setminus \set{v_b}$, only $v_b$ has $u$ in its odd neighbourhood.
> 
> If we now call $g'$ our $g$ after all of these updates, we get a certificate in the statement. Note that we did not change the lacking sets, and that the partial order is compatible with our changes.

In this proof, we only needed to update correction sets, but it's also common to have to move lacking vertices around, or having to change the partial order.

In the definition of glack, you may notice that $O$ and $L$ play somewhat of a similar role. Indeed, $g$ does not care about their difference, which immediately brings us to an extraction algorithm.

In the first step, we consider $L$ to be outputs as well, with its measurement in the ZX-calculus turned into a post-selection. As now all vertices in $\overline O$ have a correction set. In other words, we simply have a diagram with gflow, which can be extracted in the standard way.

Unfortunately, this requires a certificate. As of yet, for glack $\geq 2$, I don't have an efficient algorithm for finding certificates. In my thesis, I do discuss a "blind" algorithm that functions without a certificate, but it may introduce *more* extra ancillae than just the $\abs L$ we introduce in the previous algorithm. (This is quite likely, in fact.)

Optimizations and glack
=======================

While I won't go into the full depth of optimization that you can do to these diagrams, I will discuss a simple example. You can imagine that when simplifying graphs, we would quite often want to delete vertices. With gflow, this is not too bad usually, but there is one restriction.

> (**Lemma**[^2]) Let $(G, I, O, \lambda)$ be an open graph with gflow, and $u \in \overline O$ with $\lambda(u) \neq \XY$. Then $(G \setminus \set u, I, O, \lambda)$ has gflow.

Removing internal non-XY vertices is sufficient for most needs, but what would happen if you really wanted to remove an internal XY-vertex, or an input or output vertex? With glack, this is an easy analysis.

> (**Lemma**) Let $(G, I, O, \lambda)$ be an open graph with a glack of $k$, and let $u$ be *any* vertex. Then $(G \setminus \set u, I \setminus \set u, O \setminus \set u, \lambda)$ has a glack of at most $k+1$.

In general, the problem is that vertices may reference $u$ in their correction sets. If, for a vertex $v$, *every* correction set requires $u$, removing $u$ causes $v$ to not have any valid correction set any longer -- $v$ just became lacking.

Luckily, we discussed a lemma earlier that states that our certificates can be simplified.

> *Proof.* Recall the lemma earlier: we may assume that our certificate is such that $u$ is referenced by *at most* vertices $v_a$ (in its correction set) and $v_b$ (in its odd neighbourhood). What we do is denote $v_a$ (if it exists) to be lacking, and then remove $u$ from the graph.
> 
> Let $v \neq v_a$ be an arbitrary vertex. The only change that may happen is that we remove $u$ from $\Odd(g(v))$. None of the gflow conditions care about this update. This means that the same correction set is valid even after removal.
> 
> As such, $(L \cup \set{v_a} \setminus u, g, \prec)$ might be a certificate for our updated graph. However, there may still exist a better certificate, which gives us the "at most" in our statement.

In my thesis, I looked at quite some operations that maintain gflow, and conclude they do not break down when generalizing to glack. The proofs are very often of the same flavour as above.

However, ironically the generalisation of "remove a non-XY vertex" is the *one* statement that becomes quite tricky. The vertex we remove is additionally required not to be something I call *completely lacking*. Checking whether a vertex satisfies this is hard -- it requires you to enumerate *all certificates*. Remember that I don't even have an efficient algorithm for finding *one*.

I strongly believe these completely lacking vertices do not exist, however. For a vertex $u$ like this to exist, applying the certificate simplification lemma to *any* certificate must result in both a $v_a$ and a $v_b$. This is a very strict requirement, and indeed, I have not been able to construct an example of this kind.

If completely lacking vertices do not exist, optimization schemes for diagrams with gflow translate directly to optimization schemes for diagrams with glack, without increasing the glack. Unfortunately, I did not manage to prove this.

Conclusion
==========

In this post, I discussed a very brief outline of my thesis. There is a lot I glossed over -- for starters, my discussion of the ZX-calculus skipped over 75% of the content. I barely discussed what operations maintain gflow or glack. I also skimmed over the extraction algorithms, which are discussed in-depth.

However, to keep this post somewhat manageable, I have to wrap things up! If you've managed to read this far, I have to sincerely ask: "are you nuts?"; there's only like four people on earth that could get something from this post...

In any case, thanks for reading, and see you next time!

[/block]

[^1]: Pronunciation pending. While /ˈd͡ʒiːlæk/ is consistent with the pronunciation of *gflow*, the inherent comedic value of /glæk/ ought to be considered as well.
[^2]: Insert There and Back reference here.

{:/nomarkdown}